>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 8: TWO
AMERICANS ARE FREED FROM
CAPTIVITY IN NORTH KOREA; WHAT
THE PRESIDENT’S DECISION TO SEND
ANOTHER 1,500 MILITARY ADVISORS
TO IRAQ MEANS IN THE WAR AGAINST
ISIS-- A TOP MILITARY EXPERT
WEIGHS IN; AND IN OUR SIGNATURE
SEGMENT, THE UNTOLD STORY BEHIND
LAST SUMMER’S SURGE IN ILLEGAL
IMMIGRATION-- HOW AN ACT OF
CONGRESS IN THE ’90s MAY HAVE
LED TO VIOLENCE THAT FUELED THE
EXODUS.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS IN
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
TWO AMERICANS HELD CAPTIVE IN
NORTH KOREA HAVE BEEN SET FREE
AND ARE ON THEIR WAY HOME.
KENNETH BAE OF WASHINGTON STATE
HAD BEEN HELD SINCE THE FALL OF
2012.
LAST YEAR, HE WAS SENTENCED TO
15 YEARS HARD LABOR FOR WHAT
NORTH KOREA DESCRIBED AS A
CHRISTIAN PLOT TO OVERTHROW THE
GOVERNMENT.
MATTHEW TODD MILLER OF
CALIFORNIA WAS TAKEN INTO
CUSTODY LAST SPRING AND
REPORTEDLY HAD BEEN SENTENCED TO
SIX YEARS OF HARD LABOR.
BOTH MEN WERE ACCOMPANIED HOME
BY JAMES CLAPPER, THE U.S.
DIRECTOR OF NATIONAL
INTELLIGENCE.
DAYS AGO, NORTH KOREA REPORTEDLY
SECRETLY ASKED THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION TO SEND AN ENVOY
TO PYONGYANG TO DISCUSS THE
CAPTIVES’ RELEASE.
SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN KERRY
INSISTED TODAY THAT ANY POSSIBLE
COOPERATION BETWEEN IRAN AND THE
UNITED STATES IN THE FIGHT
AGAINST ISIS WOULD NOT INFLUENCE
NEGOTIATIONS TO CURB IRAN’S
NUCLEAR PROGRAM.
>> THERE IS NO LINKAGE
WHATSOEVER OF THE NUCLEAR
DISCUSSIONS WITH ANY OTHER
ISSUE, AND I WANT TO MAKE THAT
ABSOLUTELY CLEAR.
THE NUCLEAR NEGOTIATIONS ARE ON
THEIR OWN.
THEY ARE STANDING SEPARATE FROM
ANYTHING ELSE, AND NO DISCUSSION
HAS EVER TAKEN PLACE ABOUT
LINKING ONE THING TO ANOTHER,
ONE INVOLVEMENT WITH ANOTHER.
>> Sreenivasan: THE "WALL STREET
JOURNAL REPORTED THURSDAY THAT
PRESIDENT OBAMA HAD WRITTEN
IRAN’S SUPREME LEADER, AYATOLLAH
ALI KHAMANEI, LAST MONTH SEEKING
HIS COOPERATION IN THE FIGHT
AGAINST ISIS.
KERRY MEETS TOMORROW WITH IRAN’S
FOREIGN MINISTER.
THE DEADLINE FOR A COMPREHENSIVE
NUCLEAR DEAL BETWEEN IRAN AND
THE WEST IS NOVEMBER 24.
A TOP EUROPEAN UNION OFFICIAL
TODAY CALLED FOR THE IMMEDIATE
CREATION OF A SEPARATE
PALESTINIAN STATE TO END THE
PALESTINIAN-ISRAELI CONFLICT.
THE E.U.’S NEW FOREIGN AFFAIRS
CHIEF, FEDERICA MOGHERINI,
COMMENTED DURING A VISIT TO THE
GAZA STRIP.
>> WE ARE ASKING ALL IN THIS
MOMENT-- NOT IN THREE MONTHS,
NOT IN SIX MONTHS, NOT IN ONE
YEAR-- ALL IN THIS MOMENT TO
RESTART A POLITICAL PROCESS THAT
CAN LEAD TO THE TWO-STATE
SOLUTION.
>> Sreenivasan: TODAY’S NEWS
COINCIDES WITH REPORTS THAT
SEVERAL EUROPEAN NATIONS ARE
CONSIDERING UNILATERALLY
RECOGNIZING A PALESTINIAN STATE,
JUST AS SWEDEN DID LAST MONTH.
AUTHORITIES IN MEXICO NOW
BELIEVE THEY KNOW WHAT HAPPENED
TO THOSE 43 STUDENTS WHO WENT
MISSING IN SEPTEMBER.
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL’S OFFICE
THERE SAYS ARRESTED GANG MEMBERS
HAVE CONFESSED TO KILLING THE
STUDENTS AND THEN BURNING THEIR
BODIES.
REMAINS HAVE BEEN FOUND AND ARE
BEING TESTED.
FEDERAL MEXICAN AUTHORITIES
THEORIZE THAT CORRUPT LOCAL
OFFICIALS HAD CONSPIRED WITH
DRUG GANGS TO HAVE THE STUDENTS
KILLED.
A POSSIBLE STEP FORWARD FOR
WOMEN IN SAUDI ARABIA.
ACCORDING TO THE ASSOCIATED
PRESS, A HIGH-LEVEL ADVISORY
PANEL TO THE KING HAS
RECOMMENDED THAT DRIVING
RESTRICTIONS ON WOMEN BE EASED.
UNDER THE PLAN, WOMEN OLDER THAN
30 WOULD BE ALLOWED TO DRIVE
UNTIL 8:00 AT NIGHT AS LONG AS
THEY WEAR CONSERVATIVE OUTFITS
AND NO MAKEUP.
THEY WOULD ALSO NEED PERMISSION
FROM A MALE RELATIVE.
SOME SAUDI MEDIA DISPUTED THE
ACCOUNT.
THE PRESIDENT MADE IT OFFICIAL
TODAY.
HE IS NOMINATING LORETTA LYNCH
TO BECOME THE NEXT ATTORNEY
GENERAL OF THE UNITED STATES.
SHE IS A 55-YEAR-OLD FEDERAL
PROSECUTOR IN NEW YORK.
>> I WILL WORK EVERYDAY TO
SAFEGUARD OUR CITIZENS, OUR
LIBERTIES, OUR RIGHTS, AND THIS
GREAT NATION, WHICH HAS GIVEN SO
MUCH TO ME AND MY FAMILY.
>> Sreenivasan: IF CONFIRMED BY
THE U.S. SENATE, SHE WOULD
BECOME THE NATION’S FIRST
AFRICAN-AMERICAN WOMAN TO HOLD
THE POST.
STILL ANOTHER STUDENT HAS DIED
IN THE AFTERMATH OF THAT SCHOOL
CAFETERIA SHOOTING NORTH OF
SEATTLE TWO WEEKS AGO.
THE LATEST VICTIM IS 15-YEAR-OLD
ANDREW FRYBERG.
HIS COUSIN, JAYLEN FRYBERG, WAS
THE SHOOTER.
THREE 14-YEAR-OLDS WERE ALSO
KILLED IN THE ATTACK.
WORD OF A NEW TOOL TO FIGHT THE
HARASSMENT OF WOMEN ONLINE.
TWITTER IS TEAMING UP WITH A
WOMEN’S ADVOCACY GROUP TO HELP
USERS REPORT AND IDENTIFY
ABUSIVE BEHAVIOR ON THE ONLINE
PLATFORM IN THE HOPES OF
RESOLVING IT WITHIN 24 HOURS.
THE COMPANY HAD BEEN CRITICIZED
FOR NOT RESPONDING AGGRESSIVELY
ENOUGH TO ONLINE ABUSE CLAIMS.
AND SOME NEW, MORE DIVERSE FACES
MIGHT SOON BE USED FOR THOSE
EMOJI SYMBOLS THAT YOU PROBABLY
HAVE SEEN OR USED ON YOUR
SMARTPHONES.
THIS IS WHAT A FACE LOOKS LIKE
TODAY, BUT THIS IS WHAT
ENGINEERS SAY THEY COULD LOOK
LIKE IN THE FUTURE.
THE NEW SKIN TONES COULD BE
ROLLED OUT BY THE MIDDLE OF NEXT
YEAR.
AND A NEW MEASURE OF WEALTH
INEQUALITY HAS BEEN RELEASED.
THE CHARITY, OXFAM, SAYS THE 85
RICHEST PEOPLE ON EARTH TOGETHER
HAVE THE SAME AMOUNT OF MONEY AS
THE POOREST 3.5 BILLION PEOPLE.
THE GROUP SAYS THE NUMBER OF
BILLIONAIRES HAS DOUBLED IN THE
PAST FIVE YEARS, A PERIOD IT
SAYS THAT HAS BEEN MARKED BY AN
EXPLOSION IN INEQUALITY.
>> Sreenivasan: IN IRAQ, A
SUICIDE BOMBER ATTACKED A POLICE
CONVOY, KILLING EIGHT PEOPLE,
INCLUDING A SENIOR OFFICER.
THE INCIDENT OCCURRED IN THE
CITY OF BEIJI, THE SITE OF THE
NATION’S LARGEST OIL REFINERY,
APPROXIMATELY 150 MILES NORTH OF
BAGHDAD.
GOVERNMENT FORCES HAVE BEEN
BATTLING ISLAMIC STATE
EXTREMISTS THERE FOR SOME TIME
NOW.
AT LEAST 32 OTHERS WERE KILLED
TODAY IN A SERIES OF BOMBINGS IN
AND AROUND BAGHDAD.
ALL THIS, A DAY AFTER PRESIDENT
OBAMA ANNOUNCED PLANS TO DOUBLE
THE NUMBER OF AMERICAN MILITARY
ADVISORS IN IRAQ TO ABOUT 3,000.
FOR MORE, AS PART OF OUR
CONTINUING INTERVIEW SERIES,
"THE WAR ON ISIS," WE ARE JOINED
NOW FROM WASHINGTON BY ANTHONY
CORDESMAN.
HE IS WITH THE CENTER FOR
STRATEGIC AND INTERNATIONAL
STUDIES AND WAS THE DIRECTOR OF
INTELLIGENCE ASSESSMENT IN THE
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF
DEFENSE.
I THINK THE FIRST QUESTION
THAT A LOT OF PEOPLE HAVE ON
THEIR MINDS IS, IS THIS MISSION
CREEP?
WHY ARE WE SENDING THESE
ADDITIONAL TROOPS IN?
>> I THINK WE NEED TO UNDERSTAND
WHAT THE MISSION REALLY IS.
WE HAVE PEOPLE ON THE GROUND TO
ESSENTIALLY REBUILD THE IRAQI
ARMY, CREATE A SUNNI FORCE IN
THE AREAS NOW OCCUPIED BY THE
ISLAMIC STATE, AND HELP THE
PESHMERGA BECOME AN EFFECTIVE
MILITARY FORCE.
NOW, WE HAD ABOUT 1,400 PEOPLE
OFFICIALLY ON THE GROUND WHEN
THIS ANNOUNCEMENT WAS MADE.
THE ACTUAL NUMBERS WERE HIGHER,
BUT NOT EVERYBODY WAS BEING
COUNTED.
BUT THAT WAS SCARCELY ENOUGH TO
TRAIN NINE BRIGADES OF IRAQI
FORCES, AND THE IRAQI ARMY HAS
TO BE REBUILT ALMOST FROM THE
GROUND UP.
IT WASN’T ENOUGH TO TRAIN AN
ADDITIONAL THREE PESHMERGA
BRIGADES.
AND ADDING ANOTHER 1,500 PEOPLE
CERTAINLY ISN’T GOING TO BE THE
END OF THIS MISSION.
IF WE’RE SUCCESSFUL AND WE CAN
CREATE SUNNI UNITS AS WELL,
WHICH IS ESSENTIAL TO DRIVING
OUT THE ISLAMIC STATE.
SO IT ISN’T A MATTER OF MISSION
CREEP.
FROM THE START IT’S BEEN CLEAR,
THE AIR CAMPAIGN COULD ONLY WORK
IF YOU COULD GET POLITICAL UNITY
WITHIN IRAQ, AND YOU COULD
CREATE A MIX OF IRAQI GROUND
FORCES THAT COULD DRIVE THE
ISLAMIC STATE OUT.
>> Sreenivasan: SO IS THERE
SOME CONFIDENCE THAT EITHER THE
U.S. OR ANYONE ELSE HAS THAT
ADDING THESE 1,500 MILITARY
TRAINERS, RAMPING UP, LET’S SAY,
ANOTHER 20,000 IRAQI TROOPS IN A
FEW MONTHS, WILL BE ENOUGH?
>> WE NEED TO BE VERY CAREFUL
HERE.
NO, THERE IS NO CONFIDENCE THAT
THIS WILL BE ENOUGH.
FIRST, IT ISN’T A MATTER OF
MONTHS, ALTHOUGH YOU CAN MAKE
PROGRESS WITH THE BETTER UNITS
IN THAT TIME.
IT’S BEEN STATED VERY CLEARLY
THIS COULD TAKE SEVERAL YEARS.
AND FOR IT TO WORK, YOU HAVE TO
CONVINCE THE SUNNIS IN THE
WESTERN PART OF IRAQ AND IN KEY
AREAS IN THE NORTH LIKE MOSUL,
THAT THEY WILL SPLIT WITH THE
ISLAMIC STATE, THAT THEY WILL
HAVE THEIR OWN MILITARY IDENTITY
IN THESE NATIONAL GUARD UNITS,
AND THOSE NATIONAL GUARD UNITS
ARE GOING TO REQUIRE A MAJOR
U.S. EFFORT TO TRAIN AND EQUIP.
>> Sreenivasan: WAS THERE A
TIPPING POINT THAT FORCED THIS?
IN THE LAST FEW WEEKS WE’VE
TALKED ABOUT SEVERAL ATTACKS
GETTING CLOSER AND CLOSER TO THE
CITY OF BAGHDAD.
>> NO, NOT REALLY.
I MEAN, THE FACT THAT IT CAN
OPERATE NEAR BAGHDAD OR BAGHDAD
AIRPORT HAS BEEN A REALITY FOR
MONTHS NOW.
THE TIPPING POINT IS POLITICAL.
WHAT’S HAPPENED IS THAT MALIKI,
WHO PROVOKED A CIVIL WAR, IS
GONE.
YOU HAVE A PRIME MINISTER WHO
NOW HAS A MINISTER OF DEFENSE
AND A MINISTER OF INTERIOR.
YOU HAVE SOMETHING APPROACHING A
NATIONAL GOVERNMENT.
YOU NOW HAVE THE ABILITY TO PUT
U.S. ADVISERS IN THAT CAN
ACTUALLY TRAIN IRAQI FORCES AND
HELP REBUILD THE ARMY THAT
MALIKI HELPED DESTROY.
AND YOU HAVE ENOUGH CONSENSUS TO
BOOST AND SUPPORT THE PESHMERGA
FORCES.
THIS IS AN ONGOING POLITICAL
STRUGGLE.
WE DON’T KNOW HOW IT WILL COME
OUT.
AND AS YET, THE SUNNIS, WHICH
ARE KEY TO OUR SUCCESS, HAVE NOT
IN ANY MEANINGFUL WAY, TURNED
AGAINST THE ISLAMIC STATE.
>> Sreenivasan: WHILE WE’VE
BEEN FOCUSED ON THE TROOP
MOVEMENTS AND THE INCREASED
PRESENCE OF AMERICAN TROOPS IN
IRAQ, WHAT’S BEEN HAPPENING IN
SYRIA?
>> WELL, WE SUFFERED VERY
SERIOUS REVERSES.
TWO OF THE KEY ELEMENTS THAT WE
PUT TRAINING AND ARMS INTO, THE
ONLY REALLY MODERATE ELEMENTS IN
THE NORTHERN PART OF SYRIA
HAVE SUFFERED SERIOUS DEFEATS
NEAR THE TURKISH BORDER BY A
DIFFERENT ISLAMIST EXTREMIST
GROUP, THE AL-NUSRA FRONT.
WE DON’T KNOW HOW MUCH EQUIPMENT
THEY’VE LOST, HOW MUCH MILITARY
CAPABILITY THEY’VE LOST, BUT THE
UNITS WE DID MOST TO TRAIN AND
THAT WERE SUPPOSED TO BE THE
CORE OF THIS FORCE OF FREE
SYRIAN UNITS THAT WE WERE GOING
TO BUILD UP WITH 5,000 BEING
TRAINED IN SAUDI ARABIA, AND
ANOTHER 5,000 TRAINED ELSEWHERE,
HAVE TAKEN A VERY SERIOUS SET OF
REVERSES.
HOW BAD THAT REVERSE IS, IS
SOMETHING WHICH THE DEPARTMENT
OF DEFENSE COULDN’T ESTIMATE, AT
LEAST AS OF YESTERDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
ANTHONY CORDESMAN JOINING US
FROM WASHINGTON, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> A PLEASURE.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT, OUR ORIGINAL
IN-DEPTH REPORTS FROM AROUND THE
NATION AND AROUND THE WORLD.
TONIGHT, WE TAKE YOU TO EL
SALVADOR, ONE OF THE CENTRAL
AMERICAN NATIONS FROM WHICH TENS
OF THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE FLED LAST
SUMMER BEFORE BEING APPREHENDED
TRYING TO CROSS INTO THE UNITED
STATES FROM MEXICO.
THEIR ARRIVAL AND DETENTION HAS
BEEN WIDELY REPORTED, BUT MUCH
LESS HAS BEEN WRITTEN ABOUT THE
CONDITIONS BACK HOME THAT LED TO
THEIR FLIGHT AND EVEN LESS ABOUT
HOW U.S. POLICIES MAY HAVE
CONTRIBUTED TO IT.
NEWSHOUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
JOHN CARLOS FRAY REPORTS.
>> Reporter: MIGUEL ANGEL GOMEZ,
A 30-YEAR-OLD TAXI DRIVER HERE
IN EL SALVADOR, SPENDS A LOT OF
TIME LOOKING IN HIS REARVIEW
MIRROR, WORRIED THAT HE WILL BE
THE NEXT VICTIM OF A NOTORIOUSLY
VIOLENT STREET GANG THAT ALREADY
MURDERED MIGUEL’S BROTHER.
A LOCAL NEWS REPORT SHOWED THE
SCENE OF THE CRIME.
>> (translated): FIRST, THEY
SHOT HIM, AND THEN THEY BEHEADED
HIM.
HERE, IF THEY DON’T LIKE YOU OR
FOR ANY LITTLE THING, THEY HAVE
YOU KILLED.
>> Reporter: MIGUEL SAYS HIS
BROTHER WAS NOT PART OF A GANG
AND HAS NO IDEA WHY HIS BROTHER
WAS KILLED, BUT MIGUEL SAYS GANG
MEMBERS ARE NOW AFTER HIM
BECAUSE THEY BELIEVE THAT HE’LL
SEEK REVENGE.
WHAT HAPPENS TO YOU AND YOUR
WIFE IF YOU BOTH STAY HERE IN EL
SALVADOR?
>> (translated): THEY WILL
KILL US.
>> Reporter: HE AND HIS WIFE ARE
NOW PLANNING TO ILLEGALLY CROSS
THE BORDER INTO TEXAS, WHERE
THEY HAVE RELATIVES.
SINCE LAST JANUARY, MORE THAN
230,000 UNDOCUMENTED CENTRAL
AMERICANS, MANY OF THEM
CHILDREN, HAVE CROSSED INTO THE
UNITED STATES FLEEING VIOLENCE
PERPETRATED BY GANGS AND DRUG
CARTELS IN COUNTRIES LIKE EL
SALVADOR, HONDURAS AND
GUATEMALA.
WITH ALL THE REPORTING ABOUT THE
CURRENT CRISIS, WHAT’S LITTLE
UNDERSTOOD IS THAT THE MASS
EXODUS TO THE UNITED STATES
EARLIER THIS YEAR WAS ACTUALLY
30 YEARS IN THE MAKING, FUELED
BY AMERICAN FOREIGN POLICY
DECISIONS IN THE EARLY 1980s AND
AN ACT OF CONGRESS IN THE MID
1990s.
>> THERE ARE EXPERTS WHO SAY
THIS IS ALL AMERICA’S FAULT, AND
THERE ARE THOSE WHO SAY IT’S NOT
OUR FAULT BECAUSE WE’RE
FOLLOWING THE RULES.
AND THEN, THERE’S PEOPLE LIKE ME
SORT OF ON THE FENCE.
>> Reporter: IT ALL BEGAN IN THE
EARLY 1980s, WHEN EL SALVADOR
WAS IN THE MIDST OF A BRUTAL
CIVIL WAR.
IT WAS THE HEIGHT OF THE COLD
WAR, AND THE REAGAN
ADMINISTRATION, FEARFUL OF
COMMUNIST EXPANSION IN CENTRAL
AMERICA, SUPPORTED THE MILITARY-
BACKED GOVERNMENT WITH ARMS AND
FINANCING.
75,000 WERE KILLED IN THE
CONFLICT, MOSTLY AT THE HANDS OF
GOVERNMENT FORCES.
IT’S ESTIMATED THAT HUNDREDS OF
THOUSANDS OF SALVADORANS FLED
THEIR WAR-TORN COUNTRY, SEEKING
REFUGE IN THE UNITED STATES.
>> THE MASS EXODUS OF
SALVADORIANS TO FLEE THE
CONFLICT DOWN THERE PUT A LARGE
POPULATION OF SALVADORIAN
IMMIGRANTS IN LOS ANGELES.
>> Reporter: AL VALDEZ IS A 28-
YEAR VETERAN OF THE POLICE FORCE
IN ORANGE COUNTY, CALIFORNIA,
WHO SPECIALIZED IN UNDERCOVER
FIELD OPERATIONS AND HEADED THE
GANG INVESTIGATION UNIT FOR THE
ATTORNEY GENERAL’S OFFICE THERE.
HE EXPLAINS THAT MANY OF THESE
SALVADORAN FAMILIES LIVED IN
POVERTY IN THE ROUGH
NEIGHBORHOODS AROUND DOWNTOWN
LOS ANGELES.
SOME OF THESE NEW IMMIGRANTS
JOINED LATINO GANGS LIKE 18th
STREET GANG AND MARA SALVATRUCHA
13, OR M.S. 13, FOR BOTH
PROTECTION AND A LIVELIHOOD.
>> KIDS JOIN GANGS AS A
MECHANISM TO SURVIVE.
NOW, GRANTED, YOUR LIFE SUCKS,
BUT AT LEAST YOU’RE ALIVE AND
YOU HAVE FOOD AND WATER, AND YOU
HAVE PROTECTION.
>> Reporter: MANY OF THOSE
SALVADORAN GANG MEMBERS ENDED UP
IN CALIFORNIA PRISONS, AND THIS
IS WHERE THAT ACT OF CONGRESS
COMES IN.
BEFORE 1996, ONLY CRIMINALS
CONVICTED OF VIOLENT FELONIES
WITH SENTENCES OF FIVE YEARS OR
MORE COULD BE DEPORTED.
BUT ALL THAT CHANGED IN 1996,
WHEN, IN AN ATTEMPT TO GET TOUGH
ON ILLEGAL IMMIGRATION, CONGRESS
PASSED A LAW ALLOWING
AUTHORITIES TO DEPORT CRIMINALS
IF THEY HAD A PRISON SENTENCE OF
JUST ONE YEAR.
THIS LED TO THE DEPORTATION OF
TENS OF THOUSANDS OF GANG
MEMBERS TO CENTRAL AMERICA, MANY
TO EL SALVADOR.
ONCE THEY ARRIVED, THEY SET UP
SHOP HERE AND RECRUITED LOCAL
SALVADORANS INTO THE GANGS.
MANY OF THE NEW RECRUITS WERE
TEENAGERS WHO JOINED FOR THE
MONEY AND FOR THE STREET CRED;
OTHERS BECAUSE THEY’D BEEN
THREATENED THAT IF THEY REFUSED
TO JOIN, THEY’D BE KILLED.
>> THOSE COUNTRIES, CENTRAL
AMERICA, WAS RIPE FOR A CRIMINAL
CULTURE TO OVERTAKE IT BECAUSE
OF ITS SEVERE POVERTY AND THE
LACK OF OPPORTUNITIES, THE
CORRUPTION INVOLVED.
IT WAS LIKE A PETRI DISH THAT
YOU PUT AN EBOLA VIRUS IN IT AND
IT’S GOING TO GROW LIKE CRAZY.
>> WE HAD A PRETTY POTENTIALLY
GRAVE CRIME PROBLEM REPRESENTED
BY THESE GANG MEMBERS THAT ARE
BEING DEPORTED AND A VERY YOUNG
POLICE FORCE THAT WAS GOING TO
HAVE TO DEAL WITH IT.
>> Reporter: CARLOS PONCE, A
PROMINENT SALVADORAN CRIME
ANALYST AND FORMER DIRECTOR OF
RESEARCH FOR THE NATIONAL POLICE
FORCE, SAYS THE COUNTRY WAS
UNPREPARED FOR THIS WAVE OF GANG
MEMBERS WHO HAD CUT THEIR TEETH
ON THE STREETS OF LOS ANGELES.
TO MAKE MATTERS WORSE, PONCE
SAYS, WHEN THESE DEPORTATIONS
STARTED, U.S. AUTHORITIES WERE
PROVIDING NO INFORMATION ABOUT
WHO WAS HEADING THEIR WAY.
WAIT A MINUTE.
SO, THE U.S. WAS DEPORTING
CRIMINALS WITHOUT THEIR CRIMINAL
RECORDS?
>> YEAH, YEAH.
>> Reporter: YOU DIDN’T KNOW WHO
WAS COMING INTO THE COUNTRY?
>> WE DIDN’T KNOW WHO WAS COMING
AND, YOU KNOW, THEY WERE FREE TO
DO AS THEY PLEASED.
>> Reporter: WHILE PONCE SAYS
THAT COORDINATION WITH THE
UNITED STATES HAS IMPROVED,
DEPORTATIONS OF GANG MEMBERS
CONTINUE TO THIS DAY.
SO, HOW MUCH RESPONSIBILITY DO
YOU GIVE THE UNITED STATES FOR
THE GANG PROBLEM IN EL SALVADOR?
>> I THINK THE U.S.
RESPONSIBILITY SHOULD’VE BEEN,
OR COULD BE, THAT WE SHOULD
ADVISE THE LOCAL OFFICIALS IN
THE COUNTRIES OF REPATRIATION OF
EXACTLY WHO WE’RE SENDING BACK--
THAT "THIS GUY WAS ARRESTED FOR
MURDER, HE DID TIME FOR MURDER.
THIS GUY WAS ARRESTED FOR
ROBBERY.
HE’S A SEXUAL PREDATOR.
WE’RE SENDING THEM BACK."
YOU NEED TO HAVE THIS DATA TO
MAKE YOUR COUNTRY SAFE.
>> Reporter: IMMIGRATION AND
CUSTOMS ENFORCEMENT TOLD US THAT
"THE REMOVAL OF KNOWN VIOLENT
CRIMINAL GANG MEMBERS AND
FOREIGN FUGITIVES ARE AMONG THE
AGENCY’S HIGHEST ENFORCEMENT
PRIORITIES.
DURING THE REMOVAL PROCESS, ICE
WORKS CLOSELY WITH FOREIGN
GOVERNMENTS TO SHARE ALL
RELEVANT INFORMATION ABOUT
INDIVIDUALS BEING RETURNED, TO
INCLUDE THEIR CRIMINAL HISTORY."
WERE YOU A BAD KID?
>> I WAS PRETTY BAD.
TO THIS TIME NOW, I’M STILL BAD.
>> Reporter: 32-YEAR-OLD MANUEL
FLORES, ALSO KNOWN AS "SAD BOY"
BY FELLOW GANG MEMBERS IN LOS
ANGELES, WAS DEPORTED FROM A
FEDERAL PRISON TO EL SALVADOR
JUST ABOUT A TWO YEARS AGO.
FLORES RECOUNTED HIS DAYS IN
ROUGH SOUTH CENTRAL L.A.
>> GANGBANG ON THE RIVAL FROM A
DIFFERENT HOOD.
>> Reporter: ARE YOU TALKING
ABOUT VIOLENCE?
>> UH-HUH.
>> Reporter: BEATING PEOPLE UP?
>> YEAH.
>> Reporter: SHOOTING PEOPLE?
KILLING PEOPLE?
>> UH-HUH.
>> Reporter: SO, YOU WERE
INVOLVED WITH PEOPLE WHO WERE
KILLING OTHER PEOPLE?
>> YEAH.
YES.
>> Reporter: FLORES’ STORY
EMBODIES THIS 30-YEAR CYCLE OF
VIOLENCE THAT LED TO WHAT
PRESIDENT OBAMA CALLED A
HUMANITARIAN CRISIS ALONG THE
U.S.-MEXICO BORDER THIS PAST
SUMMER.
WHEN HE WAS ONLY SIX MONTHS OLD,
HE AND HIS FAMILY FLED THE CIVIL
WAR IN EL SALVADOR.
HE GREW UP IN L.A., BECAME A
GANG MEMBER, WAS IMPRISONED
AFTER STABBING SOMEONE IN THE
NECK, AND EVENTUALLY DEPORTED
BACK TO EL SALVADOR.
NOW, HE ACKNOWLEDGES THAT HE IS
LIKELY TO RESUME HIS LIFE OF
CRIME, CRIME THAT IN PART FUELED
LAST SUMMER’S MASS MIGRATION.
YOU WANT TO GO BACK TO THE
STREETS?
>> YES.
IF YOU WANT TO MAKE MONEY FOR
YOU AND YOUR PEOPLE, I MEAN, YOU
JUST GO AHEAD AND GANGBANG ALL
YOUR LIFE.
>> THE GANG MEMBERS ARE...
STROLL ON THE STREETS WITH THEIR
RIFLES SHOWING.
I MEAN, JUST OUT OF THE MOST
EXAGGERATED MOVIE YOU CAN SEE
ABOUT GANGS IN THE MOST SAVAGE
COUNTRY YOU CAN IMAGINE.
AND THAT’S WHY AT THE END PEOPLE
ARE LEAVING THE COUNTRY, BECAUSE
THEIR FAMILIES AND THEIR KIDS
DON’T HAVE A CHANCE AGAINST THIS
MONSTER THAT HAS BEEN GROWING
AND GROWING FOR THE LAST FEW
YEARS.
>> Reporter: IN A COUNTRY OF
JUST SIX MILLION, THERE ARE NOW
A REPORTED SEVEN MURDERS A DAY,
ACCORDING TO THE U.S. STATE
DEPARTMENT.
AND A RECENT SURVEY CONDUCTED
HERE FOUND THAT ONE OUT OF FOUR
SALVADORANS HAS CONSIDERED
LEAVING THE COUNTRY DUE TO
VIOLENCE AND THE LACK OF
ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY.
PEOPLE ARE FLEEING YOUR COUNTRY
BECAUSE THEY ARE AFRAID OF YOU.
THEY’RE AFRAID OF THE GANGS.
>> (translated): IT’S CLEAR,
MAN.
I ACCEPT THAT.
>> Reporter: THIS HIGH-LEVEL
MEMBER OF THE 18th STREET GANG,
WHO ASKED TO BE CALLED
"SANTIAGO," ALSO AGREED TO TALK
WITH US.
SANTIAGO SAID HE KNOWS ALL ABOUT
SALVADORANS, MANY OF THEM
CHILDREN, FLEEING TO THE U.S. TO
ESCAPE CRIMINALS LIKE HIM, AND
HE’S JUST FINE WITH THAT.
>> (translated): IT DOESN’T
BOTHER ME.
YOU KNOW WHY?
WHY WOULDN’T I WANT A CHILD THAT
WILL BECOME A GANG MEMBER HERE
TO LEAVE THE COUNTRY?
LET HIM PICK UP AND GO AND GET
REUNITED WITH HIS MOTHER IN THE
U.S. AND HAVE ACCESS TO A
QUALITY EDUCATION.
>> Reporter: THE SALVADORAN
AUTHORITIES TELL US THEY ARE
DOING ALL THEY CAN TO STOP THE
VIOLENCE AND KEEP THEIR CITIZENS
FROM FLEEING TO THE U.S., BUT
THEY SAY THEY ARE UP AGAINST IT.
20,000 OFFICERS TRYING TO BATTLE
60,000 GANG MEMBERS.
A RAID ON 18th STREET GANG
MEMBERS IN A HILLTOP VILLAGE BY
THE ANTI-GANG TASK FORCE
ILLUSTRATES THE PROBLEM.
ON A PITCH-BLACK, MOONLESS
NIGHT, WE FOLLOW THE OFFICERS
INTO A WOODED CLIFF-SIDE AREA
DOTTED WITH ADOBE HOMES.
USING BATTERING RAMS, THE
OFFICERS RAIDED MULTIPLE
RESIDENTS SIMULTANEOUSLY.
DESPITE METICULOUSLY PLANNING
THE RAID FOR TWO MONTHS, BY THE
END OF THE EVENING, POLICE ONLY
ARRESTED TWO OF THE TEN
SUSPECTED GANG MEMBERS THEY WERE
LOOKING FOR.
LATER, THEY SPECULATED THAT THE
GANG MEMBERS HAD BEEN TIPPED
OFF.
EL SALVADOR’S INABILITY TO
DEFEAT THE GANGS CONTINUES TO
FUEL MIGRATION TO THE U.S.,
DESPITE THE TENS OF MILLIONS OF
DOLLARS A YEAR THE U.S. IS NOW
POURING INTO THIS CENTRAL
AMERICAN NATION FOR BOTH
SECURITY AND ECONOMIC
ASSISTANCE.
REMEMBER TAXI DRIVER MIGUEL
ANGEL GOMEZ, WHOSE BROTHER WAS
DECAPITATED BY GANG MEMBERS?
LATELY, HE SAYS, THEY’VE BEEN
FOLLOWING HIM AS HE DRIVES HIS
TAXI.
>> (translated): I FEEL THAT
THE MORE TIME PASSES, THE CLOSER
THEY GET.
>> Reporter: WHICH IS WHY, AFTER
REQUESTING AND BEING DENIED
ASYLUM IN THE UNITED STATES,
HE’S STILL PLANNING TO GO TO THE
U.S. ILLEGALLY.
HE’S NOT THE ONLY ONE IN OUR
STORY HEADING TO AMERICA.
MANUEL FLORES, THE GANG MEMBER
THE UNITED STATES SENT BACK TO
EL SALVADOR, SAYS HE IS PLANNING
TO RETURN, TOO.
>> Sreenivasan: GO INSIDE THE
NOTORIOUS 18th STREET GANG, ONE
OF THE MOST DANGEROUS IN EL
SALVADOR.
READ OUR PRODUCER’S NOTEBOOK
FROM THAT COUNTRY AT
newshour.pbs.org.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: TUCKED AWAY IN
THE CONSTELLATION TAURUS IN
DISTANT SPACE, PLANETS ARE BEING
BORN.
HOW DO WE KNOW?
BECAUSE SCIENTISTS ARE OBSERVING
IT HAPPEN MORE CLEARLY THAN EVER
BEFORE.
USING THE ALMA RADIO TELESCOPE
IN CHILE, ASTRONOMERS WERE ABLE
TO CAPTURE THIS IMAGE SHOWING A
STAR SURROUNDED BY A LARGE DISC
MADE OF GAS AND DUST.
IT MAY LOOK LIKE AN ARTIST’S
ILLUSTRATION, BUT, IN FACT, AT
THE CENTER OF THIS IMAGE IS THE
REAL H.L. TAURI STAR.
AND THE DARK RINGS-- THAT’S
BELIEVED TO BE THE DUST AND GAS
COMING TOGETHER TO FORM PLANETS,
METEORS AND ASTEROIDS.
H.L. TAURI IS 450 LIGHT YEARS
FROM EARTH, AND EVEN THOUGH IT’S
ALMOST ONE MILLION YEARS OLD,
ASTRONOMERS CONSIDER IT QUITE
YOUNG.
FOR DECADES, ASTRONOMERS HAVE
KNOWN OF THE EXISTENCE OF THE
STAR BUT HAVE NEVER BEEN ABLE TO
SEE IT CLEARLY.
BUT NOW, HIGH UP IN CHILE’S
ATACAMA DESERT, SCIENTISTS
ARE USING RADIO FREQUENCIES TO
GATHER EMISSIONS FROM GAS, DUST
AND STARS TO MAKE HIGH-
RESOLUTION IMAGES OF THE
UNIVERSE, IMAGES EVEN SHARPER
THAN SOME OF THOSE TAKEN FROM
SPACE BY NASA’S HUBBLE
TELESCOPE.
THE FINDINGS HAVE SHAKEN
ASTRONOMERS’ THEORIES.
>> EVEN AT THIS YOUNG AGE, ALMA
HAS DISCOVERED THAT WE ALREADY
HAVE LARGE PLANETARY CORES
FORMING.
SO, THE PROCESS OF PLANET
FORMATION HAS TO OCCUR MUCH
FASTER AND MUCH EARLIER THAN WE
HAD EVER EXPECTED.
>> Sreenivasan: THE NEW PICTURE
HAS GOTTEN SCIENTISTS EXCITED
ABOUT THE POSSIBILITIES OF THE
TELESCOPE.
>> IMAGE AND DISCOVERY REPRESENT
A MILESTONE IN THE HISTORY OF
ALMA, AND IT’S A DREAM THAT’S
COME TRUE.
I MEAN, PEOPLE HAVE THOUGHT
ABOUT IT FOR 20 YEARS, AND NOW
WE SEE IT.
>> Sreenivasan: WITH THE NEW
IMAGE DISPLAYING DETAIL NEVER
BEFORE SEEN, ASTRONOMERS ARE NOW
HOPING TO EXPAND OUR
UNDERSTANDING OF HOW PLANETS
FORM BOTH WITHIN AND OUTSIDE OUR
OWN SOLAR SYSTEM.
>> Sreenivasan: SOME MORE NEWS
BEFORE WE LEAVE YOU TONIGHT.
THE PENTAGON CONFIRMS THAT U.S.
WARPLANES HIT A GATHERING OF TOP
ISIS LEADERS, POSSIBLY INCLUDING
ITS TOP COMMANDER, ABU BAKR AL-
BAGHDADI.
ONE ARAB TELEVISION NETWORK
QUOTED SOURCES AS SAYING
BAGHDADI WAS CRITICALLY WOUNDED.
THAT’S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
THE NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I’M HARI SREENIVASAN.
SEE YOU BACK HERE TOMORROW
NIGHT.